+++
title = "Evaluation"
subtitle = ""
description = ""
url= "evaluation"
date = 2021-03-20T15:13:22Z
draft = false
featured_image = "../images/evaluation.jpg"
images = ["../images/tw-card-07.png"]
menu = "main"
weight = 80
toc = true
+++
## A working definition of evaluation

As we have discussed, analysis as a process is part of everything that social workers do. It is evident in the written record through the selection of the particular detail you include and the specific language you use to provide an account of a situation. However, there are also parts of the written record where you make your summary evaluation of a situation explicit. _Analysis, evaluation, professional evaluation, professional assessment, professional view_ are all terms used to refer to those parts in a written record where you offer your professional commentary and conclusion on a particular situation.

Lisa Lewis, the experienced social worker talks about analysis in written records. A key part of written summary analysis or evaluation is making _claims_. A claim is a statement asserting something to be true or accurate. Here Lisa is talking through some examples of the claims made in written social work records.

### Video - Analysis

{{< vimeo 523782609 >}}

The key points about making claims in written records include:

* Any claim needs to be based on evidence. What counts as evidence in written records are the careful descriptions and explanations you provide.
* Claims do not need to be stated ‘categorically’, that is as if 100% true in order to be convincing. What is important is that the particular way a claim is worded is in line with the descriptive evidence available. Writing _Hannah appears settled_ rather than _Hannah **is** settled_ is an example of a cautious claim. Writing _The children **are** vulnerable_ rather than _the children **appear** vulnerable_ is an example of a categorical claim.
* Claims need to be carefully worded and in line with any descriptive evidence offered. If claims are based on insufficient, irrelevant or vague description, any claims made will not be convincing and may affect the outcomes of any report, such as the allocation of services and resources.

## Using external sources in evaluation

Using external sources of authority – published theory, research and legislation – are important in evaluating a particular situation and are used to underpin, explore and question evidence generated by a social worker. An understanding of relevant research and theory is central to professional practice, including analytic writing, and is reflected in the use of particular terms, such as ‘attachment’ (to refer to the relationship between a  child and caregiver) or ‘autism’ (to describe a person’s behaviour characterised by difficulty in social interaction and communication).  However, explicit reference to the particular theories and research relating to the use of such terms is often not included. There is ongoing debate about whether theory and research should be explicitly referred to in written analysis, but if you use specialist terms you may be asked to justify your use in particular situations e.g. in court statements.

For discussion, see <https://www.communitycare.co.uk/2019/06/04/social-work-need-rethink-counts-evidence-based-practice/>

Legislation underpins many of the kinds of records that social work keeps. There are statutory requirements to keep particular records and complete assessments to particular deadlines and timescales. Explicit reference to legislation may be important in offering an evaluation of a particular event or actions, for example, in one case record a social worker refers to legislation to support his action in carrying out an assessment, in a context where the person is unlikely to qualify for services:  

> "…the duty to assess arises even if there is little prospect of the individual actually qualifying for the services, either because of resource limitations on the part of the  local authority or because of the financial circumstances of the service user…"  
**(R v Bristol City Council ex parte Penfold [1998] 1 CCLR315) (Lillis, 2017)**

## Your professional voice

A key issue in writing evaluation is how to present yourself, as the professional with specific expertise, in the written text. Research has shown that the professional view, or voice, of the social worker can sometimes be missing in written records. There is considerable use made of impersonal language constructions, such as ‘it was considered that..’, ‘it was agreed that..’, ‘action was taken to..’ rather than making explicit who considered, agreed etc. It is also the case that some social workers feel unsure about the validity of making their professional voice explicit.

> “I don’t think that professional opinion sits easily with social workers. We’ve been trained that you don’t give a view, you’re not here to give your view.”  
**(Social worker, Adult Services) (Theresa Lillis, Lucy Rai, Guillermo  Garcia-Maza, G. (2010) ‘Action Research Project on case notes recording’. Final Report.)**

Of course there is no place for unsubstantiated opinion or bias in professional writing. There sometimes can be confusion about what being ‘subjective’ in professional writing means – being ‘subjective’ in the everyday sense of simply expressing an unsubstantiated view is not acceptable. However, being ‘subjective’ in the sense of bringing your professional subjectivity to bear – that is, your insights, knowledge, careful weighing up of a situation based on evidence – is essential. The most obvious way to make your professional voice clear in writing is to use the first person: ‘I consider that…’, I have reached the conclusion that’… You may feel that other expressions also convey your professional view e.g. ‘On the basis of the evidence, it seems likely that…’ but some readers may not ‘read’ this as being an explicit statement of your position, so you need to align the expressions you use with expectations of different readers.

## Thinking about the language of evaluation

In writing evaluations of a situation, there are particular kinds of language often used. It is useful to think about:

* The language of the claim you make: how categorical or hedged should your claim be based on the evidence included? e.g. _Hannah **is** settled or Hannah **appears** settled._
* Causal words and phrases: what kinds of causal links can you make on the basis of the evidence? Causal words include _therefore, thus, so,  because, as such._
* Contrasting words and phrases: are there particular contrasts you wish to emphasise? Contrasting words include: _nevertheless, however, on the one hand, on the other hand, sometimes/at other times._
* Professional voice: how explicit is your professional voice? Explicit expressions of voice include: _my view is, on the basis of x, I consider that, I believe that…_
* Specialist language and theory: have you included any terms that implicitly refer to particular research, theory or legislation? Do you think you need to explicitly reference the source?

## Practical exercise: Evaluation

Think of or re-read a recent record (a case note, an assessment report). Identify any parts of the text where you are explicitly evaluating a particular situation.  

* Is your professional position clearly stated?
* Will the reader be able to identify your summary evaluation and the basis on which it is made?
* Are there any revisions you think you could make to sharpen the evaluation in any way?
